-- README-3810                                     --
-- Notes, bugs and a todo list for the 3810 series --

* Notes *

Phones in the 3810 series that have been tested to date are
3110, 3810, 8110, 8110i with either the DAU-4F cable or in
one or two cases a home made cable.  Specific phone/
network combinations appear in the main README file.

After some digging in to the protocol it has become apparent
that there aren't many more functions we can support, compared
to our 5110/6110 cousins!  Remaining functionality which I would
like to add appears in the To-do section below, suggestions
are welcome.

The code for reading/writing phonebook entries has had limited testing
but the read code is believed to be solid.  It has been observed
that the write code occasionally fails to write a location for
reasons as yet unknown.  The format of the input to the write
option is relatively unforgiving and does only very basic parsing.
This format should be compatible with the output from the Windows
NCDS software.

Routines for retrieving SMS messages have been tested and appear
to be bug free.  The 3810 used for testing appears to ignore the
memory type field however. 

Sending SMS is still something of "black art".  This has been tested
on a 3810 on the Australian Optus/Hutchison network.  Most of the
time the messages are sent as expected but occasionally they
fail for no apparent reason.  The code is designed to re-try up
to four times before giving up if a 0x65 0x26 response is received.

Sometimes however error codes are seen 0x65 0xYY, the meaning
of which is unknown.  Any light you can cast on this is welcome.
It is possible that switching off the phone and switching
on again may help but this may be just a coincidence.

It should also be noted that the SMS header message sent by
FB38_TX_Send0x23_SendSMSHeader code has no less than 10 bytes
in it that aren't understood.  The values used are simply those
that have been observed.  They may have to be totally different
on your network :(  They may inadvertently route the message to
a distant land or just not work at all.

Having said all of the above about SMS sending, a number of people
have now tested SMS sending on various networks around the world and
in the main have found it to work correctly.

* Functionality *
 
The following functions/facilities are available for the 3810 series
phones.

- Retrieving and writing single or multiple phone book entries from
  either SIM or (in the case of the 8110s) internal memory.
  
- Retrieving and deleting single or multiple stored SMS messages from
  either SIM or (again in the case of 8110s) internal memory.
  
- Sending an SMS message to a specified recipient via a specified
  message center number.
  
- By way of a message in --monitor mode, receive notification 
  of the following occuring;
  
  + Incoming call being received, answered and hung up.
  + Outgoing call being made, answered and hung up.
  + Incoming SMS message
  + Current phone status (connected to network, call progress etc.)

- Retrieve current RF and battery level
  
- Retrieve IMEI, Model and Revision information

 
* Known Bugs *

fbus-3810 code cannot (yet) automatically determine the maximum
length of the name and phone number fields in the SIM.  Similarly
it cannot yet determine the maximum number of SIM locations. 
These are defined in fbus-3810.h

The status (read or unread, sent or unsent) of SMS messages
retrieved from memory is not known so these flags are always
set to read / sent.

* To-do *
Add support to automatically determine the maximum number of SIM
entries and lengths of phonebook and name fields.

Try building under Win32 and report success/failure to the list.
